gluon-mesh-wireless-sae
=======================

This package adds support for SAE on 802.11s mesh connections.

Enabling this package will require all 802.11s mesh connections
to be encrypted using the SAE key agreement scheme. The security
of SAE relies upon the authentication through a shared secret.

In the context of public mesh networks a shared secret is an
obvious oxymoron. Still, this functionality may provide an improvement
over unencrypted mesh connections in that it protects against a
passive attacker who did not observe the key agreement. In addition
Management Frame Protection (802.11w) gets automatically enabled on
wireless mesh interfaces to prevent protocol-level deauthentication attacks.
Similar security advancements are also independently available for the client
network using OWE with :doc:`gluon-wireless-encryption-wpa3`.

If `wifi.mesh.sae` is enabled, a shared secret will automatically be
derived from the `prefix6` variable. This is as secure as it gets
for a public mesh network.

For *private* mesh networks `wifi.mesh.sae_passphrase` should be
set to your shared secret.

site.conf
---------
These settings apply to all 802.11s mesh interfaces on all radios.

wifi.mesh.sae \: optional
  - ``true`` enables SAE on 802.11s mesh connections
  - ``false`` disables SAE on 802.11s mesh connections
  - defaults to ``false``

wifi.mesh.sae_passphrase \: optional
  - sets a shared secret used to authenticate any two mesh nodes,
    crucial for private mesh networks
  - should not be set, if the shared secret is shared with untrusted
    third parties, like in a public mesh network
  - defaults to an autogenerated value derived from ``prefix6``


Example::

  wifi = {
    mesh = {
      sae = true,
      -- sae_passphrase = "<shared secret>",
    },
  },

