Gluon 2017.1.2
==============

New features
~~~~~~~~~~~~

* Preserve *gw_mode* on sysupgrades (`#1196 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/1196>`_)

  When a Gluon node is used as uplink (for example by connecting it to a router with
  a DHCP server directly, instead of using non-Gluon servers for the internet uplink),
  the *gw_mode* must be set to *server* on that node. The changed *gw_mode* is now
  preserved on upgrades.

* Allow configuring the batman-adv routing algorithm (*BATMAN IV* or *BATMAN V*)
  in *site.conf* (`#1185 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/1185>`_)

  *BATMAN V* still hasn't received extensive testing (and is incompatible with *BATMAN IV*).
  This new option allows to set up *BATMAN V*-based test meshes. If unset, the routing
  algorithm will default to *BATMAN IV*.

  Configuration:

  .. code-block:: lua

    mesh = {
      batman_adv = {
        routing_algo = 'BATMAN_V'
      }
    }

* New *show-release* Make target

  The command ``make show-release`` can be used to print the release number
  defined by *GLUON_RELEASE* to the standard output. This can be useful for build scripts
  when a ``$(shell ...)`` expression is used in *site.mk* to generate the release
  number.

Bugfixes
~~~~~~~~

* The image build code used for some devices has been fixed, solving multiple
  issues (`#1193 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/1193>`_)

  Problems caused by this issue include:

  - sysupgrade rejecting Allnet images
  - OpenMesh devices losing their configuration on upgrades

  This is a regression introduced in Gluon v2017.1.

* Improve sysupgrade error handling (`#1160 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/1160>`_)

  If for some reason processes don't react to SIGKILL (usually because of a kernel bug),
  a node could hang forever in sysupgrade, requiring a power cycle. This has been
  fixed, triggering a reboot instead.

* Also display *gluon-config-mode:novpn* message when Tunneldigger is installed, but disabled
  (`#1172 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/1172>`_)

  It was only displayed on nodes with fastd before.

* Fix migration of enabled/disabled state between fastd and Tunneldigger
  (`#1187 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/1187>`_)

Known issues
~~~~~~~~~~~~

* Default TX power on many Ubiquiti devices is too high, correct offsets are unknown (`#94 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/94>`_)

  Reducing the TX power in the Advanced Settings is recommended.

* The MAC address of the WAN interface is modified even when Mesh-on-WAN is disabled (`#496 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/496>`_)

  This may lead to issues in environments where a fixed MAC address is expected (like VMware when promicious mode is disallowed).

* Inconsistent respondd API (`#522 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/522>`_)

  The current API is inconsistent and will be replaced eventually. The old API will still be supported for a while.

* Sporadic segfaults of busybox (ash) when running shell scripts on ar71xx
  (`#1157 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/1157>`_)

  The workaround added in Gluon v2017.1.1 has greatly reduced the frequency of
  segfaults, but did not make them disappear completely.
