Gluon 2018.2.4
==============

End of life
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This will be the final release of the v2018.2.x series. Updating to the v2019.1.x release series is the recommended course of action, which should be fairly easy.

Bugfixes
~~~~~~~~

* Fixes device alias for Ubiquiti UniFi AC LR. (`#1834 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/1834>`_)
  Autoupdates on this model were impossible before, since we were missing the proper device alias.

* Add correct ath10k firmware package for Ocedo Koala. (`#1838 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/pull/1838>`_)

* Fixes various batman-adv bugs with backports from 2019.4 and 2019.5 by updating the openwrt-routing packages feed

Other changes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* Linux kernel has been updated to either

  - 4.9.207 (ar71xx, brcm2708, mpc85xx) or
  - 4.14.160 (ipq40xx, ipq806x, mvebu, ramips, sunxi, x86).

Known issues
~~~~~~~~~~~~

* Default TX power on many Ubiquiti devices is too high, correct offsets are
  unknown (`#94 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/94>`_)

  Reducing the TX power in the Advanced Settings is recommended.

* The MAC address of the WAN interface is modified even when Mesh-on-WAN is
  disabled (`#496 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/496>`_)

  This may lead to issues in environments where a fixed MAC address is expected
  (like VMware when promiscuous mode is disallowed).

* Inconsistent respondd API
  (`#522 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/522>`_)

  The current API is inconsistent and will be replaced eventually. The old API
  will still be supported for a while.

* Frequent reboots due to out-of-memory or high load due to memory pressure on
  weak hardware especially in larger meshes
  (`#1243 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/1243>`_)

  Optimizations in Gluon 2018.1 have significantly improved memory usage.
  There are still known bugs leading to unreasonably high load that we hope to
  solve in future releases.
