Gluon 2016.2.3
==============

Added hardware support
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

ar71xx-generic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* TP-Link TL-WR940N v4
* TP-Link TL-WR1043ND v4

Removed hardware support
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Support for Meraki devices (MR12/16/62/66) has been removed for now because of
severe problems (all devices were using the same MAC addresses). Support will return
when the issues have been fixed.

Bugfixes
~~~~~~~~

* Automatically restart respondd on failure (`#863 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/863>`_)

  There have been many reports of respondd processes disappearing; the exact cause is unclear,
  but might be related to the batman-adv debugfs interface and/or out-of-memory conditions.

  A new respondd initscript uses procd to automatically restart respondd when it dies.

* Make autoupdater timeouts more robust (`#987 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/987>`_)

  It was reported that wget processes sometimes hang indefinitely during the autoupdater manifest
  download. The autoupdater has been improved to ensure that wget can always be interrupted after
  a timeout.

  This issue, together with the recent addition of lock files to ensure that only one instance
  of the autoupdater can run at a time, had caused the autoupdater to blocked completely
  by hanging processes in some cases (till a node was rebooted).

* Fix regulation domain switching in ath10k (`#1001 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/pull/1001>`_)

  Prevents use of too high transmission power in some cases.

* Ensure that *prefix6* in site.conf is always a /64 prefix (`6b62e2f <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/commit/6b62e2fc788cd1f83f6634288a15724dfc42b0fd>`_)

  Other prefix lengths were never supported and don't make sense in many places the prefix is used. Ensure
  that such configurations will not pass validation.

Known Issues
~~~~~~~~~~~~

* Default TX power on many Ubiquiti devices is too high, correct offsets are unknown (`#94 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/94>`_)

  Reducing the TX power in the Advanced Settings is recommended.

* The MAC address of the WAN interface is modified even when Mesh-on-WAN is disabled (`#496 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/496>`_)

  This may lead to issues in environments where a fixed MAC address is expected (like VMware when promicious mode is disallowed).

* Inconsistent respondd API (`#522 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/522>`_)

  The current API is inconsistent and will be replaced eventually. The old API will still be supported for a while.
