Gluon 2019.1.3
==============

Bugfixes
--------

- Fixes a bug in the tunneldigger watchdog where the watchdog would incorrectly find itself while looking up the running tunneldigger process. It then went on and assumed a PID mismatch between the tunneldigger service and its PID file and therefore caused an unnecessary restart of the tunnel. (`#1952 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/1952>`_)

- Fixes an oversight in the firewalling of the respondd service where queries from prefix listed in ``extra_prefixes6`` would be dropped. (`#1941 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/1941>`_)

- Fixes a bug in ``gluon-web`` where forms would not correctly update their field visibility on reset. This affected, for example, the private wifi page in the config mode. (`#1970 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/pull/1970>`_)

- Fixes RX buffer sizing in the ath10k driver to allow for frames larger than 1528 Bytes. (`#1992 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/pull/1992>`_)

- Fixed handling of mesh interfaces together with outdoor mode, site.conf defaults and config mode (`#2049 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/pull/2049>`_) (`#2054 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/pull/2054>`_)

- Fixes a bug with perl when building Gluon v2019.1.x with GCC10

- Fixes a buffer leak in fastd when receiving invalid packets

Other Changes
-------------

- Linux kernel has been updated to either

  - 4.9.237 (ar71xx, brcm2708, mpc85xx) or
  - 4.14.199 (ipq40xx, ipq806x, mvebu, ramips, sunxi, x86).

- Backports of batman-adv bugfixes

Known issues
------------

* Out of memory situations with high client count on ath9k.
  (`#1768 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/1768>`_)

* The integration of the BATMAN_V routing algorithm is incomplete.

   - | Mesh neighbors don't appear on the status page. (`#1726 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/1726>`_)
     | Many tools have the BATMAN_IV metric hardcoded, these need to be updated to account for the new throughput
     | metric.

   - | Throughput values are not correctly acquired for different interface types.
     | (`#1728 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/1728>`_)
     | This affects virtual interface types like bridges and VXLAN.

* Default TX power on many Ubiquiti devices is too high, correct offsets are unknown
  (`#94 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/94>`_)

  Reducing the TX power in the Advanced Settings is recommended.

* The MAC address of the WAN interface is modified even when Mesh-on-WAN is disabled
  (`#496 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/496>`_)

  This may lead to issues in environments where a fixed MAC address is expected (like VMware when promiscuous mode is
  disallowed).

* Inconsistent respondd API (`#522 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/522>`_)

  The current API is inconsistent and will be replaced eventually. The old API will still be supported for a while.

* Frequent reboots due to out-of-memory or high load due to memory pressure on weak hardware especially in larger
  meshes (`#1243 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/1243>`_)

  Optimizations in Gluon 2018.1 have significantly improved memory usage.
  There are still known bugs leading to unreasonably high load that we hope to
  solve in future releases.

