Gluon 2018.1.1
==============

Bugfixes
~~~~~~~~

* Fix a bug leading to configuration loss on upgrade under certain circumstances
  (`#1496 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/1496>`_)

  The issue can only occur when upgrading from 2018.1 and there are multiple
  mirror entries in *site.conf* (specifically, an early failure for one of the
  mirrors, e.g. during DNS resolution, followed by a successful upgrade from a
  different mirror triggers the issue).

  This is a regression in Gluon 2018.1.

* Fix next-node ARP issue
  (`#1488 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/1488>`_)

  A routing table issue led to ARP requests being sent from the next-node IPv4 address, but with
  a node-specific source MAC address. This could make the next-node IPv4 address unreachable.

  This is a regression in Gluon 2018.1.

* Fix build on hosts with glibc 2.28

  Fixed by various tool upgrades in LEDE (*bison*, *e2fsutils*, ...)

Other changes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* Linux kernel has been updated to v4.4.148

Known issues
~~~~~~~~~~~~

* Default TX power on many Ubiquiti devices is too high, correct offsets are unknown (`#94 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/94>`_)

  Reducing the TX power in the Advanced Settings is recommended.

* The MAC address of the WAN interface is modified even when Mesh-on-WAN is disabled (`#496 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/496>`_)

  This may lead to issues in environments where a fixed MAC address is expected (like VMware when promiscuous mode is disallowed).

* Inconsistent respondd API (`#522 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/522>`_)

  The current API is inconsistent and will be replaced eventually. The old API will still be supported for a while.

* Frequent reboots due to out-of-memory or high load due to memory pressure on weak hardware specially in larger meshes
  (`#1243 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/1243>`_)

  Optimizations in Gluon 2018.1 have significantly improved memory usage.
  There are still known bugs leading to unreasonably high load that we hope to
  solve in future releases.
