Gluon 2016.1.6
==============

Bugfixes
~~~~~~~~

* build: fix nodejs host build on Debian Wheezy (`#776 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/776>`_)
* build: fix parallel builds with Make 4.2+

  Trying to use ``-j N`` with Make 4.2 would spawn an unlimited number of processes,
  eventually leading to memory exhaustion.

* build: fix occasional build failure in libpcap package
* build: don't require hexdump for x86 builds (`#811 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/811>`_)

  Trying to build Gluon for x86 on systems without hexdump would silently generate
  broken images.

* Add support for DNS servers given by their link-local IPv6 address in Router Advertisements
  (`#854 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/854>`_)

* ar71xx-generic: correctly setup LNA GPIOs on CPE210/510 (`#796 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/796>`_)

  Improves the reception by about 20dB.

* ar71xx-generic: switch default WAN/LAN assignment on Ubiquiti UAP Pro
  (`#764 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/764>`_)

  Switch to the usual "PoE is WAN/setup mode, secondary is LAN" scheme. This only affects
  new installations; the assignment won't be changed on updates unless the configuration is
  reset.

* ar71xx-generic: fix ath10k memory leak (`#690 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/690>`_)
* ar71xx-generic: add support for new TP-Link region codes
  (`#860 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/860>`_)

  TP-Link has started providing US- and EU-specific firmwares for the Archer C7 v2. To generate
  Gluon images installable from these new firmwares, the ``GLUON_REGION`` variable must be set
  to ``eu`` or ``us`` in ``site.mk`` or on the ``make`` command line (the images will still be
  installable from all old firmwares without region codes).

Known Issues
~~~~~~~~~~~~

* Default TX power on many Ubiquiti devices is too high, correct offsets are unknown (`#94 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/94>`_)

  Reducing the TX power in the Expert Mode is recommended.

* The MAC address of the WAN interface is modified even when Mesh-on-WAN is disabled (`#496 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/496>`_)

  This may lead to issues in environments where a fixed MAC address is expected (like VMware when promicious mode is disallowed).

* Inconsistent respondd API (`#522 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/522>`_)

  The current API is inconsistent and will be replaced eventually. The old API will still be supported for a while.
