Gluon 2018.1.2
==============

Bugfixes
~~~~~~~~

* Fix a bug leading to missing IPv6 addresses in respondd announcements
  (`#1523 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/1523>`_)

  The pattern that was used to match addresses from /proc/net/if_inet6
  did not expect interface indexes growing past two characters.

* Mark ipq806x target as broken for unstable client WiFi
  (`#1505 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/1505>`_)

  Station connections to the QCA9880 radio on the TP-Link C2600s are frequently
  disconnected, leading to an abysmal user experience.

* Fix button behaviour on FRITZ!Box 4020
  (`#1544 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/pull/1544>`_)

  Buttons were triggering an instant reboot into config mode, fix by setting
  buttons to active low instead of active high.

* Prevent caching of redirects on config mode and status page
  (`#1530 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/1530>`_)

  As the path to both config mode and status page were changed between versions
  users could be affected by a redirect to a no more valid URL. 

* batman-adv has received two bugfixes, which were `backported <https://github.com/openwrt/routing/commit/7bf62cc8b556b5046f9bbd37687376fe9ea175bb>`_ from v2018.4

Other changes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* Linux kernel has been updated to v4.4.153

Known issues
~~~~~~~~~~~~

* Missing kernel module dependencies prevent batman-adv from being loaded on devices without WiFi drivers  (`#1578 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/1578>`_)

* Default TX power on many Ubiquiti devices is too high, correct offsets are unknown (`#94 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/94>`_)

  Reducing the TX power in the Advanced Settings is recommended.

* The MAC address of the WAN interface is modified even when Mesh-on-WAN is disabled (`#496 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/496>`_)

  This may lead to issues in environments where a fixed MAC address is expected (like VMware when promiscuous mode is disallowed).

* Inconsistent respondd API (`#522 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/522>`_)

  The current API is inconsistent and will be replaced eventually. The old API will still be supported for a while.

* Frequent reboots due to out-of-memory or high load due to memory pressure on weak hardware specially in larger meshes
  (`#1243 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/1243>`_)

  Optimizations in Gluon 2018.1 have significantly improved memory usage.
  There are still known bugs leading to unreasonably high load that we hope to
  solve in future releases.
