Gluon 2018.2.3
==============

Added hardware support
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

ar71xx-generic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* TP-Link

  - CPE210 v3
  
ar71xx-nand
^^^^^^^^^^^

* Aerohive

  - HiveAP 121

mcp85xx-p1020
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* Aerohive

  - HiveAP 330

ramips-mt76x8
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* TP-Link

  - TL-MR3420 v5 [#noibss]_
  
.. [#noibss]
  Device or target does not support AP+IBSS mode: This device or target will not be built
  when *GLUON_WLAN_MESH* is set to ``ibss``.


Bugfixes
~~~~~~~~

* Fixes passwordless SSH access when gluon-authorized-keys was used without gluon-setup-mode. (`#1777 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/1777>`_)

* Fixes ingress traffic shaping. A necessary kernel config value was not set. (`#1790 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/1790>`_)

* Fixes the generation of the bootloader image for the AVM FRITZ!Box 4040. (`#1766 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/1766>`_)

* Fixes the IBSS mesh on the GL.iNet AR750. The wrong driver/firmware package was previously selected. (`#1792 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/pull/1792>`_)

* Fixes the primary mac selection on the TP-Link Archer C25 v1. (`#1771 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/1771>`_)


Other changes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* Linux kernel has been updated to either
  
  - 4.9.188 (ar71xx, brcm2708, mpc85xx) or
  - 4.14.137 (ipq40xx, ipq806x, mvebu, ramips, sunxi, x86).


Known issues
~~~~~~~~~~~~

* Default TX power on many Ubiquiti devices is too high, correct offsets are
  unknown (`#94 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/94>`_)

  Reducing the TX power in the Advanced Settings is recommended.

* The MAC address of the WAN interface is modified even when Mesh-on-WAN is
  disabled (`#496 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/496>`_)

  This may lead to issues in environments where a fixed MAC address is expected
  (like VMware when promiscuous mode is disallowed).

* Inconsistent respondd API
  (`#522 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/522>`_)

  The current API is inconsistent and will be replaced eventually. The old API
  will still be supported for a while.

* Frequent reboots due to out-of-memory or high load due to memory pressure on
  weak hardware especially in larger meshes
  (`#1243 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/1243>`_)

  Optimizations in Gluon 2018.1 have significantly improved memory usage.
  There are still known bugs leading to unreasonably high load that we hope to
  solve in future releases.
