Gluon 2018.2.2
==============

Removed hardware support
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Support for the Onion Omega has been removed since the device does not
have an ethernet port, and even with the ethernet shield connected the
interface would not have been configured.

Bugfixes
~~~~~~~~

* Fixes vulnerabilities that allowed for remote crashes and denial of service attacks through the Linux kernels
  TCP selective acknowledgement implementation. (CVE-2019-11477, CVE-2019-11478 and CVE-2019-11479)

* Fixes a bug in the image generation for the Netgear R6120 where the OverlayFS might not be created on boot as
  the JFFS2 end-of-filesystem marker was omitted by the vendor firmware. This resulted in the router not being
  able to save its configuration and seemingly "being stuck" in config-mode. (`#1722 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/pull/1722>`_)

* Fixes oddities in the calculation of non-wireless clients published through respondd on batman-adv networks.
  Previously both the kernel wifi layer and batman-adv were consulted, which led to issues because they use 
  different timeout values. (`#1676 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/pull/1676>`_)

* Fixes doubled batman-adv management overhead, introduced with Gluon v2017.1. A timer in batman-adv was
  wrongly started twice, resulting in each node emitting not one but two OGMs from the same originator per 5 seconds.
  (`#1446 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/1446>`_)

* Fixes an issue, where services provided by a node (such as DNS resolver or status-page)
  might become unavailable due to other misbehaving nodes on the same layer 2 segment.
  (`#1659 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/1659>`_)

* Fixes traffic shaping not working correctly when using tunneldigger, as well as the migration between fastd 
  and tunneldigger (`#1736 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/1736>`_)


Other changes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* Linux kernel has been updated to 4.9.182 or 4.14.128, depending on the target


Known issues
~~~~~~~~~~~~

* Default TX power on many Ubiquiti devices is too high, correct offsets are
  unknown (`#94 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/94>`_)

  Reducing the TX power in the Advanced Settings is recommended.

* The MAC address of the WAN interface is modified even when Mesh-on-WAN is
  disabled (`#496 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/496>`_)

  This may lead to issues in environments where a fixed MAC address is expected
  (like VMware when promiscuous mode is disallowed).

* Inconsistent respondd API
  (`#522 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/522>`_)

  The current API is inconsistent and will be replaced eventually. The old API
  will still be supported for a while.

* Frequent reboots due to out-of-memory or high load due to memory pressure on
  weak hardware specially in larger meshes
  (`#1243 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/1243>`_)

  Optimizations in Gluon 2018.1 have significantly improved memory usage.
  There are still known bugs leading to unreasonably high load that we hope to
  solve in future releases.
