Gluon 2017.1.6
==============

Bugfixes
~~~~~~~~

* Remove broken DNS cache feature
  (`#1362 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/1362>`_)

  It was found that dnsmasq does not handle all answer records
  equally. In particular, its cached answers are missing DNSKEY and DS
  records, breaking DNSSEC validation on clients.

  Nodes can still resolve the next-node hostname locally and will continue to
  work as DNS forwarders. The DNS cache feature may return if dnsmasq is fixed
  or if we switch to a different resolver.

* Ensure that corefiles are stored in /tmp rather than cluttering the root
  filesystem
  (`00df8b76e54c <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/commit/00df8b76e54c9bb89299df4b2ec49e972046d6b6>`_)

  Nodes upgrades from Gluon v2016.2.x or earlier did not set kernel.core_pattern
  correctly, leading to corefiles being stored in the current directory (usually
  / for system services) in the case of crashes.

  This is a regression introduced in Gluon v2017.1.

* Only request a single IPv6 address instead of a prefix on the WAN interface
  (`5db54ba78c3 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/commit/5db54ba78c3e245f06e4a407371608f6cb247b49>`_)

* Fix signal graph on status page when there are many neighbours
  (packages/`d1e0b6e0bdae <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/packages/commit/d1e0b6e0bdaea14d8b9425cee6ca83087be1a905>`_)

* Fix config files managed by opkg not being saved on sysupgrades on ar71xx-tiny
  (LEDE/`17c0362178ca <https://git.openwrt.org/?p=openwrt/openwrt.git;a=commit;h=17c0362178caf837680a4631b8d0de94e5393448>`_,
  LEDE/`75be005e8bdc <https://git.openwrt.org/?p=openwrt/openwrt.git;a=commit;h=75be005e8bdcbf86f9ad167a8737126dda98a444>`_)

* Fix kernel crash in batman-adv-14
  (`#1358 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/1358>`_)

  Starting with Gluon v2017.1, respondd could trigger a kernel crash caused by
  a use-after-free in batman-adv-14, in particular after a gateway disappeared.

  batman-adv-15 is not affected.

* Increase bridge multicast querier timeout ("robustness") to avoid
  "querier appeared/disappeared" log spam by batman-adv in the presence of
  an external querier
  (`e305a8c01917 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/commit/e305a8c019179472dbfc6fccea6c87cf40c08a75>`_)

* Fix "broken pipe" log spam caused by the status page
  (`883c32f2f1dc <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/commit/883c32f2f1dc368626069865c07a5701e3e9bcae>`_)

* Reduce memory limit of WLAN packet queues to 256KB on devices with small RAM
  (`e63c6ca01f50 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/commit/e63c6ca01f50c96d76e5570faa290617a8a312b4>`_)

  Will hopefully make out-of-memory crashes in busy meshes less likely.

* Improve image validation for TP-Link CPE/WBS 210/510 and make it ready for
  future images
  (LEDE/`6577fe2198f5 <https://git.openwrt.org/?p=openwrt/openwrt.git;a=commit;h=6577fe2198f5c75acb1dba789941d96a036f4dae>`_)

  Future OpenWrt/Gluon images will move the image metadata ("support-list") of
  the CPE/WBS 210/510 images to a different offset. Make sysupgrade ready
  to allow installing such images.

  This change was also backported to Gluon v2016.2.x to allow direct updates
  to future Gluon master versions without installing v2017.1.x first.

* Sporadic segfaults of busybox (ash) when running shell scripts on ar71xx
  have disappeared with the latest updates
  (`#1157 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/1157>`_)


Known issues
~~~~~~~~~~~~

* Default TX power on many Ubiquiti devices is too high, correct offsets are unknown (`#94 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/94>`_)

  Reducing the TX power in the Advanced Settings is recommended.

* The MAC address of the WAN interface is modified even when Mesh-on-WAN is disabled (`#496 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/496>`_)

  This may lead to issues in environments where a fixed MAC address is expected (like VMware when promicious mode is disallowed).

* Inconsistent respondd API (`#522 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/522>`_)

  The current API is inconsistent and will be replaced eventually. The old API will still be supported for a while.

* Frequent reboots due to out-of-memory on weak hardware in larger meshes
  (`#1243 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/1243>`_)
