Gluon 2016.2.2
==============

Added hardware support
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

ar71xx-generic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* TP-Link

  - CPE210/510 EU/US versions
  - TL-WA801N/ND v3
  - TL-WR841ND v11 EU/US versions

Bugfixes
~~~~~~~~

* Fix boot on certain QCA955x-based devices (e.g. OpenMesh OM5P AC v2) (`#965 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/pull/965>`_)

  This issue was a regression in Gluon v2016.2.1.

* Build: Fix git downloads from git.kernel.org on Debian Wheezy (`#919 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/919>`_)

  We've switched back from HTTPS to the git protocol for now to avoid using
  the old GnuTLS version of Debian Wheezy which can't establish a HTTPS connection
  with git.kernel.org anymore.

  This issue was a regression in Gluon v2016.2.

* Fix RX filter of Ubiquiti UAP Outdoor+ (`d43147a8e03d <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/commit/d43147a8e03dd17bc27e4ab203736f2151f9db3d>`_)

  This issue was a regression in Gluon v2016.2.

* Fix switched WAN/LAN interface assignment on CPE210 (`59deb2064d54 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/commit/59deb2064d54a37e27139b76a3b6064f5f10f364>`_)

  This issue was a regression in Gluon v2016.2.

* Significantly reduce CPU load used by signal strength LEDs (`#897 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/897>`_)

* Fix ethernet port of the Ubiquiti UAP AC Lite (`#911 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/911>`_)

* Build: Don't use host ``/tmp`` directory (`f9072a36411b <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/commit/f9072a36411b92089c697b2c0a564155bfe10bd1>`_)

  Fixes build when ``/tmp`` is mounted with *noexec*.

* Fix mesh interface type respondd/alfred announcements when using VLANs over IBSS (`#941 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/941>`_)

* Fix next-node ebtables rules without *next_node.ip4* (`9dbe9f785d2b <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/commit/9dbe9f785d2b439c3ebdae365b808ebf42b3cf03>`_)

  Gluon v2016.2 added support for using the next-node feature without specifying an IPv4
  address. Some scripts had not been adjusted, making the next-node unreliable when
  no IPv4 address was specified.

Other changes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* x86-generic and x86-64 images now have PATA and MMC support to allow using them
  on various devices that were previously unsupported.

* Clean up opkg postinst scripts up on image generation

  OpenWrt does this by default to save a little space.

Known Issues
~~~~~~~~~~~~

* Default TX power on many Ubiquiti devices is too high, correct offsets are unknown (`#94 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/94>`_)

  Reducing the TX power in the Advanced Settings is recommended.

* The MAC address of the WAN interface is modified even when Mesh-on-WAN is disabled (`#496 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/496>`_)

  This may lead to issues in environments where a fixed MAC address is expected (like VMware when promicious mode is disallowed).

* Inconsistent respondd API (`#522 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/522>`_)

  The current API is inconsistent and will be replaced eventually. The old API will still be supported for a while.
