Gluon 2016.1.1
==============

Added hardware support
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

ar71xx-generic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* Onion Omega
* TP-Link TL-MR13U v1


Bugfixes
~~~~~~~~

Build
^^^^^

Don't overwrite the opkg repository key on each build.

AirOS 5.6.x compatiblity
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Downgrading to AirOS 5.5.x before flashing Gluon on Airmax M XM/XW devices
(NanoStation, Bullet, ...) is not necessary anymore.

Status page
^^^^^^^^^^^

* Fix purging of disappered neighbours from the list
* Don't clear the signal graphs when scrolling in mobile browsers
* Improve browser compability (don't assume the Internationalization API is available,
  fixes the display of numbers in Firefox for Android)

Config mode
^^^^^^^^^^^

* Strip trailing whitespace from number input fields (LuCI's validator doesn't catch this)
* Don't allow negative bandwidth limits

Failsafe mode
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* Fix entering the failsafe mode on the TL-WDR4900.

Known Issues
~~~~~~~~~~~~

* Default TX power on many Ubiquiti devices is too high, correct offsets are unknown (`#94 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/94>`_)

  Reducing the TX power in the Expert Mode is recommended.

* The MAC address of the WAN interface is modified even when Mesh-on-WAN is disabled (`#496 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/496>`_)

  This may lead to issues in environments where a fixed MAC address is expected (like VMware when promicious mode is disallowed).

* Inconsistent respondd/announced API (`#522 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/522>`_)

  The current API is inconsistent and will be replaced eventually. The old API will still be supported for a while.

* Nondeterministic production of broken images for some (very old) hardware (`#669 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/669>`_)

  At the moment it seems like only the TL-WR841N v5 is affected.
