Gluon 2018.2.1
==============

Added hardware support
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

ar71xx-generic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* AVM

  - Fritz!WLAN Repeater 300E

ramips-mt7620
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* Nexx

  - WT3020AD/F/H [#noibss]_

ramips-mt76x8
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* GL.iNet

  - MT300N (v2) [#noibss]_

* Netgear

  - R6120 [#noibss]_

* TP-Link

  - Archer C50 (v3, v4) [#noibss]_
  - TL-WR841N (v13) [#noibss]_

.. [#noibss]
  Device or target does not support AP+IBSS mode: This device or target will not be built
  when *GLUON_WLAN_MESH* is set to ``ibss``.

Bugfixes
~~~~~~~~

* Fixes a bug in the batman-adv respondd module that caused duplicate
  IPv6 addresses in nodeinfo replies (`#1615 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/1615>`_)

  This was visible on the status page and several map implementations.
  The new implementation uses netlink instead of parsing `/proc/net/if_inet6`.

* Fixes a localization issue in gluon-config-mode-geo-location which
  resulted in a partial translation of the wizard's location section
  text. (`#1611 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/1611>`_)

* Fixes the display of the improved memory usage estimation in gluon-status-page

  This change was actually already merged in time for v2018.2 but the
  JavaScript was not rebuilt.

* Fixes automatic updates for several devices by adding and updating
  the autoupdater image names

  This affects the following devices:

  * GL.iNet GL-AR150
  * GL.iNet GL-AR300M
  * GL.iNet GL-AR750
  * Raspberry Pi Model B+ Rev 1.2

* Fixes the primary MAC address selection for Unifi AC
  Lite/Mesh/Pro/Mesh Pro (`#1629 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/1629>`_)

* Fixes low data rate selection for multicast and management frames on
  ath10k and ath10k-ct (`#1644 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/pull/1644>`_)

  A patchset has been backported that notifies these drivers of requested data rate changes

* Fixes the data rate selection in ath10k and ath10k-ct when no
  `mcast_rate` is configured (`#1657 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/pull/1657>`_)

  Previously a missing mcast_rate could result in broken 5 GHz connectivity

New features
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Scheduled domain switch
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Gluon has support for multiple domains since its v2018.1 release.
The scheduled domain switch allows for reliable migrations between
domains at a preconfigured time.
This can be useful for communities that, among other things, plan to

  * migrate between IBSS and 802.11s
  * activate VXLAN encapsulation on wired mesh links

Improved frequency band distribution of dual-band radios
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

A new algorithm that improves the distribution of dual-band radios was
added. They will now be evenly distributed between the 2.4 and 5 GHz
band, with a preference towards 2.4 GHz.

If a device has only a single dual-band radio, like the AVM FRITZ!WLAN
Repeater 300E, it will be configured for 2.4 GHz.

Known issues
~~~~~~~~~~~~

* Default TX power on many Ubiquiti devices is too high, correct offsets are
  unknown (`#94 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/94>`_)

  Reducing the TX power in the Advanced Settings is recommended.

* The MAC address of the WAN interface is modified even when Mesh-on-WAN is
  disabled (`#496 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/496>`_)

  This may lead to issues in environments where a fixed MAC address is expected
  (like VMware when promiscuous mode is disallowed).

* Inconsistent respondd API
  (`#522 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/522>`_)

  The current API is inconsistent and will be replaced eventually. The old API
  will still be supported for a while.

* Frequent reboots due to out-of-memory or high load due to memory pressure on
  weak hardware specially in larger meshes
  (`#1243 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/1243>`_)

  Optimizations in Gluon 2018.1 have significantly improved memory usage.
  There are still known bugs leading to unreasonably high load that we hope to
  solve in future releases.
