Gluon 2016.2.5
==============

This version contains only a single bugfix for a regression introduced in Gluon v2016.2.4.
As the regression affects batman-adv compat 15 only, firmwares using the compat 14 legacy
version don't need to be updated.

Bugfixes
~~~~~~~~

* Fix kernel crash with batman-adv compat 15 (`d452a7c <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/commit/d452a7c2cf1c0da4e034666a50dc0e7aa9ddc592>`_)

  An incorrect backport of a fix for a very improbable kernel crash caused a much more
  frequent kernel crash. The backport has been fixed.

  This bug a regression in Gluon v2016.2.4.

Known Issues
~~~~~~~~~~~~

* x86 sysupgrade (sometimes) loses config when kernel partition grows (`#1010 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/1010>`_)

  This issue affects upgrades from v2016.2.x and older to the Gluon master only, we hope to fix it before the next
  major release.

* Default TX power on many Ubiquiti devices is too high, correct offsets are unknown (`#94 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/94>`_)

  Reducing the TX power in the Advanced Settings is recommended.

* The MAC address of the WAN interface is modified even when Mesh-on-WAN is disabled (`#496 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/496>`_)

  This may lead to issues in environments where a fixed MAC address is expected (like VMware when promicious mode is disallowed).

* Inconsistent respondd API (`#522 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/522>`_)

  The current API is inconsistent and will be replaced eventually. The old API will still be supported for a while.
