Gluon 2022.1.1
==============

Important notes
---------------

This release mitigates multiple flaws in the Linux wireless stack fixing RCE and DoS vulnerabilities.


Added hardware support
----------------------

ipq40xx-generic
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- GL.iNet

  - GL-AP1300

mpc85xx-p1010
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- TP-Link

  - TL-WDR4900 (v1)

ramips-mt7621
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- ZyXEL

  - NWA50AX

rockchip-armv8
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

-  FriendlyElec

   -  NanoPi R4S (4GB LPDDR4)

Bugfixes
--------

 * Multiple mitigations for (`critical vulnerabilities <https://seclists.org/oss-sec/2022/q4/20>`_) in the Linux kernel WLAN stack. This only concerns Gluon v2022.1, older Gluon versions are unaffected.

   * CVE-2022-41674
   * CVE-2022-42719
   * CVE-2022-42720
   * CVE-2022-42721
   * CVE-2022-42722
 * Fixes `security issues in WolfSSL <https://openwrt.org/releases/22.03/notes-22.03.1#security_fixes>`_. People who have installed additional, non-Gluon packages which rely on WolfSSL's TLS 1.3 implementation might be affected. Firmwares using either gluon-mesh-wireless-sae or gluon-wireless-encryption-wpa3 are unaffected by these issues, since only WPA-Enterprise relies on the affected TLS functionality.

   * CVE-2022-38152
   * CVE-2022-39173

 * Fixes the update path for GL-AR300M and NanoStation Loco M2/M5 (XW) devices.

Known issues
------------

* A workaround for Android devices not waking up to their MLD subscriptions was removed,
  potentially breaking IPv6 connectivity for these devices after extended sleep periods

* Upgrading EdgeRouter-X from versions before v2020.1.x may lead to a soft-bricked state due to bad blocks on the NAND flash which the NAND driver before this release does not handle well.
  (`#1937 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/1937>`_)

* The integration of the BATMAN_V routing algorithm is incomplete.

  - Mesh neighbors don't appear on the status page. (`#1726 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/1726>`_)
    Many tools have the BATMAN_IV metric hardcoded, these need to be updated to account for the new throughput
    metric.
  - Throughput values are not correctly acquired for different interface types.
    (`#1728 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/1728>`_)
    This affects virtual interface types like bridges and VXLAN.

* Default TX power on many Ubiquiti devices is too high, correct offsets are unknown
  (`#94 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/94>`_)

  Reducing the TX power in the Advanced Settings is recommended.

* In configurations without VXLAN, the MAC address of the WAN interface is modified even when Mesh-on-WAN is disabled
  (`#496 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/496>`_)

  This may lead to issues in environments where a fixed MAC address is expected (like VMware when promiscuous mode is disallowed).
