Gluon 2020.1.1
==============

This is the first service release for the Gluon 2020.1.x line, fixing regressions reported by
the community.

Bugfixes
--------

- Fixed non-working LEDs on TP-Link Archer C5 v1 and Archer C7 v2 after an upgrade to Gluon 2020.1.

- Fixed an issue which leads to AVM FRITZ!WLAN Repeater 450E devices being stuck in failsafe mode
  after an upgrade to Gluon 2020.1.

Other changes
-------------

- Linux kernel has been updated to 4.14.171

Known issues
------------

- Out of memory situations with high client count on ath9k.
  (`#1768 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/1768>`_)

- The integration of the BATMAN_V routing algorithm is incomplete.

  - | Mesh neighbors don't appear on the status page. (`#1726 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/1726>`_)
    | Many tools have the BATMAN_IV metric hardcoded, these need to be updated to account for the new throughput
    | metric.

  - | Throughput values are not correctly acquired for different interface types.
    | (`#1728 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/1728>`_)
    | This affects virtual interface types like bridges and VXLAN.

- Default TX power on many Ubiquiti devices is too high, correct offsets are unknown
  (`#94 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/94>`_)

  Reducing the TX power in the Advanced Settings is recommended.

- The MAC address of the WAN interface is modified even when Mesh-on-WAN is disabled
  (`#496 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/496>`_)

  This may lead to issues in environments where a fixed MAC address is expected (like VMware when promiscuous mode is
  disallowed).

- Inconsistent respondd API (`#522 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/522>`_)

  The current API is inconsistent and will be replaced eventually. The old API will still be supported for a while.

- Frequent reboots due to out-of-memory or high load due to memory pressure on weak hardware especially in larger
  meshes (`#1243 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/1243>`_)

  Optimizations in Gluon 2018.1 have significantly improved memory usage.
  There are still known bugs leading to unreasonably high load that we hope to
  solve in future releases.

- High chance of ending in a soft-bricked state for Ubiquiti EdgeRouter-X. Workaround is to
  repeat initial installation using the serial console. (`#1937 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/1937>`_)
