Gluon 2023.1.2
==============

Minor changes
-------------

- Update latest OpenWRT 22.03 version and the corresponding modules

- Always prefer Gluon feeds over upstream feeds while building (`#3026 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/pull/3026>`_)


Bugfixes
--------

- Fixed Raspberry Pi 3 and 4 naming (`#3099 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/3099>`_)

- Fixed inconsistent usage of env variable BROKEN (`#3103 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/3103>`_)

- Fixed gluon-reconfigure failures when no interface role was selected for an interface (`#3095 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/3095>`_)

- Fixed unexpected WiFi shutdowns on TP-Link Archer C7 (`#3049 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/3049>`_)

- Fixed unintentional CPU downclocks of ipq40xx devices (`#3049 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/3049>`_)

- Fixed bandwidth downstream (ingress) limit (`#3017 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/3017>`_)

- Fixed occasional reboot issues on some TP-Link WDR3600 and WDR4300 devices
  (`Upstream <https://github.com/openwrt/openwrt/issues/13043>`_)
  (`#2904 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/2904>`_)


Known issues
------------

* The integration of the BATMAN_V routing algorithm is incomplete.

  - Mesh neighbors don't appear on the status page. (`#1726 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/1726>`_)
    Many tools have the BATMAN_IV metric hardcoded, these need to be updated to account for the new throughput
    metric.
  - Throughput values are not correctly acquired for different interface types.
    (`#1728 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/1728>`_)
    This affects virtual interface types like bridges and VXLAN.

* Default TX power on many Ubiquiti devices is too high, correct offsets are unknown
  (`#94 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/94>`_)

  Reducing the TX power in the Advanced Settings is recommended.

* In configurations without VXLAN, the MAC address of the WAN interface is modified even when Mesh-on-WAN is disabled
  (`#496 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/496>`_)

  This may lead to issues in environments where a fixed MAC address is expected (like VMware when promiscuous mode is disallowed).

* EFI only systems won't boot due to removed EFI support (introduced in v2023.1). This was necessary to work around a bug that
  causes a config loss during direct upgrades from v2021.1.x to v2023.1.x with the *x86-64*, *x86-generic* and *x86-legacy* targets
  (`#2967 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/2967>`_).

  Gluon v2023.2 reintroduced EFI support.
