Gluon v2020.1.3
===============

Bugfixes
--------

- Fixes a bug in musl which can lead to spurious crashes in fastd and other programs, which alternate between single-
  and multi-threaded operation. (`#2029 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/2029>`_)

- Fixes a regression which led to around 2.5 MiB higher memory usage for ar71xx-tiny and ramips-rt305x targets.
  While this decreases the memory usage, the image will become around 64KiB larger. (`#2032 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/2032>`_)

- Fixes a bug which can cause the TP-Link TL-MR3020 v1 to become stuck in failsafe mode.


Other changes
-------------

- Linux kernel has been updated to 4.14.180


Known issues
------------

- High chance of ending in a soft-bricked state for Ubiquiti EdgeRouter-X. Workaround is to
  repeat initial installation using the serial console. (`#1937 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/1937>`_)

- Out of memory situations with high client count on ath9k.
  (`#1768 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/1768>`_)

- The integration of the BATMAN_V routing algorithm is incomplete.

   - | Mesh neighbors don't appear on the status page. (`#1726 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/1726>`_)
     | Many tools have the BATMAN_IV metric hardcoded, these need to be updated to account for the new throughput
     | metric.

   - | Throughput values are not correctly acquired for different interface types.
     | (`#1728 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/1728>`_)
     | This affects virtual interface types like bridges and VXLAN.

- Default TX power on many Ubiquiti devices is too high, correct offsets are unknown
  (`#94 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/94>`_)

  Reducing the TX power in the Advanced Settings is recommended.

- The MAC address of the WAN interface is modified even when Mesh-on-WAN is disabled
  (`#496 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/496>`_)

  This may lead to issues in environments where a fixed MAC address is expected (like VMware when promiscuous mode is
  disallowed).

- Inconsistent respondd API (`#522 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/522>`_)

  The current API is inconsistent and will be replaced eventually. The old API will still be supported for a while.

