Gluon 2021.1.1
==============

Important notes
---------------

Upgrades to v2021.1 and later releases are only supported from releases v2018.2 and later. This is due to migrations that have been removed to simplify maintenance.


Added hardware support
----------------------


ath79-generic
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* Joy-IT

    - JT-OR750i


ramips-mt76x8
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* Xiaomi

    - Mi Router 4A (100M Edition)


Bugfixes
--------

- Missing bandwidth limit settings resulted in a respondd crash for v2021.1.

- The Tunneldigger VPN provider was not registered with the Gluon VPN backend, resulting in broken Tunneldigger configurations.

- Disabling Radio interfaces in v2021.1 could lead to nullpointer dereferences in the respondd airtime module, as the survey returns no data in this case.


Known issues
------------

* Upgrading EdgeRouter-X from versions before v2020.1.x may lead to a soft-bricked state due to bad blocks on the NAND flash which the NAND driver before this release does not handle well.
  (`#1937 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/1937>`_)

* The integration of the BATMAN_V routing algorithm is incomplete.

  - Mesh neighbors don't appear on the status page. (`#1726 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/1726>`_)
    Many tools have the BATMAN_IV metric hardcoded, these need to be updated to account for the new throughput
    metric.
  - Throughput values are not correctly acquired for different interface types.
    (`#1728 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/1728>`_)
    This affects virtual interface types like bridges and VXLAN.

* Default TX power on many Ubiquiti devices is too high, correct offsets are unknown
  (`#94 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/94>`_)

  Reducing the TX power in the Advanced Settings is recommended.

* In configurations without VXLAN, the MAC address of the WAN interface is modified even when Mesh-on-WAN is disabled
  (`#496 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/496>`_)

  This may lead to issues in environments where a fixed MAC address is expected (like VMware when promiscuous mode is disallowed).
