Gluon 2020.1
============

This is the first release of Gluon in 2020, based on OpenWrt 19.07. It
introduces the ath79 target, which will replace ar71xx in the short
term.

Added hardware support
----------------------

ath79-generic
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- devolo WiFi pro 1200e
- devolo WiFi pro 1200i
- devolo WiFi pro 1750c
- devolo WiFi pro 1750e
- devolo WiFi pro 1750i
- devolo WiFi pro 1750x
- GL.iNet GL-AR300M-Lite
- Ocedo Raccoon
- TP-Link Archer C6 v2

ipq40xx-generic
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Aruba AP-303
- Aruba Instant On AP11
- AVM FRITZ!Repeater 1200

ipq806x-generic
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Netgear R7800

lantiq-xway
~~~~~~~~~~~

- AVM FRITZ!Box 7312
- AVM FRITZ!Box 7320
- AVM FRITZ!Box 7330
- AVM FRITZ!Box 7330 SL

lantiq-xrx200
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- AVM FRITZ!Box 7360 (v1, v2)
- AVM FRITZ!Box 7360 SL
- AVM FRITZ!Box 7362 SL
- AVM FRITZ!Box 7412

mpc85xx-p1020
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Enterasys WS-AP3710i
- Ocedo Panda

ramips-mt7620
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- TP-Link Archer C2 (v1)
- TP-Link Archer C20 (v1)
- TP-Link Archer C20i
- TP-Link Archer C50 (v1)
- Xiaomi MiWifi Mini

ramips-mt7621
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Netgear EX6150 (v1)
- Netgear R6220

ramips-mt76x8
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- GL.iNet VIXMINI
- TP-Link TL-MR3020 (v3)
- TP-Link TL-WA801ND (v5)
- TP-Link TL-WR902AC (v3)

Removed hardware support
------------------------

- ALFA Network Hornet-UB [#kernelpartition_too_small]_
- ALFA Network Tube2H [#kernelpartition_too_small]_
- ALFA Network N2 [#kernelpartition_too_small]_
- ALFA Network N5 [#kernelpartition_too_small]_

.. [#kernelpartition_too_small]
  The kernel partition on this device is too small to build a working image.

Major changes
-------------

OpenWrt 19.07
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Gluon v2020.1 is the first release to use OpenWrt 19.07. All targets
therefore use Linux 4.14.166.

batman-adv compat v14 removal
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Support for the long deprecated compat 14 version of batman-adv has been
dropped. Communities still using this version should migrate to batman-adv
using the scheduled domain switch.

IBSS wireless mesh removal
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Support for the IBSS wireless protocol has been dropped. Communities
still using IBSS are suggested to migrate to 802.11s using the scheduled
domain switch.

Performance enhancements
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

We install zram-swap by default on ``ar71xx`` devices with 8MB of flash
and 32MB of RAM.

Renamed targets
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- The ``ipq40xx`` target was renamed to ``ipq40xx-generic``.
- The ``ipq806x`` target was renamed to ``ipq806x-generic``.

Status Page
~~~~~~~~~~~

- Gateway nexthop information has been added to the status page when batman-adv
  is used. This includes its MAC address and prettyname as well as the interface
  name towards the selected gateway.
- The site name has been added to the status page. If the node is in a multidomain
  setup it will also show the domain name.

DECT button to enter config mode
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Many AVM devices don't feature a separate RESET/WPS button, therefore
starting this release we support entering the config mode via DECT buttons.

X86 partition size
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The x86 partition size has been reduced to fit on disks with a capacity of 128 MB.

Bugfixes
--------

Autoupdater aliases
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

We have added several new aliases for autoupdater compatibility on
the following devices:

- Ubiquiti UniFi AC LR
- Raspberry Pi

Site changes
------------

site.mk
~~~~~~~

- The ``GLUON_WLAN_MESH`` variable can be dropped, as 802.11s is
  the only supported wireless transport from now on.

Internals
---------

Linting Targets
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Support for linter make targets was added.

- ``make lint``
- ``make lint-sh`` to only check shell scripts
- ``make lint-lua`` to only check lua scripts

These require the shellcheck and luacheck tools. The docker image has
been updated accordingly.

Continuous integration
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

We have implemented continuous integration testing using Jenkins and thereby
ensure that all lua and shell scripts are linted, that the documentation
still builds and warnings are highlighted, and that Gluon still
compiles, by testing a build on the ``x86_64`` target. We expect this to
significantly improve the feedback cycle and quality of contributions.

Known issues
************

* Upgrading EdgeRouter-X from versions before v2020.1.x may lead to a soft-bricked state due to bad blocks on the
  NAND flash which the NAND driver before this release does not handle well.
  (`#1937 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/1937>`_)

* LEDs on TP-Link Archer C5 v1 and Archer C7 v2 are not working after Upgrade to v2020.1
  (`#1941 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/1941>`_)

* AVM FRITZ!WLAN Repeater 450E is stuck in failsafe mode. (`#1940 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/1940>`_)

* Out of memory situations with high client count on ath9k.
  (`#1768 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/1768>`_)

* The integration of the BATMAN_V routing algorithm is incomplete.

  - Mesh neighbors don't appear on the status page. (`#1726 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/1726>`_)

    Many tools have the BATMAN_IV metric hardcoded, these need to be updated to account for the new throughput
    metric.

  - Throughput values are not correctly acquired for different interface types.
    (`#1728 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/1728>`_)

    This affects virtual interface types like bridges and VXLAN.

* Default TX power on many Ubiquiti devices is too high, correct offsets are unknown
  (`#94 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/94>`_)

  Reducing the TX power in the Advanced Settings is recommended.

* The MAC address of the WAN interface is modified even when Mesh-on-WAN is disabled
  (`#496 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/496>`_)

  This may lead to issues in environments where a fixed MAC address is expected (like VMware when promiscuous mode is
  disallowed).

* Inconsistent respondd API (`#522 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/522>`_)

  The current API is inconsistent and will be replaced eventually. The old API will still be supported for a while.

* Frequent reboots due to out-of-memory or high load due to memory pressure on weak hardware especially in larger
  meshes (`#1243 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/1243>`_)

  Optimizations in Gluon 2018.1 have significantly improved memory usage.
  There are still known bugs leading to unreasonably high load that we hope to
  solve in future releases.

