Gluon 2022.1.4
==============

Added hardware support
----------------------

ath79-generic
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- LibreRouter

  - LibreRouter (v1)

- Teltonika

  - RUT230 (v1)


ath79-nand
~~~~~~~~~~

- Aerohive

  - HiveAP 121

- NETGEAR

  - WNDR4300 (v1)


lantiq-xrx200
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Arcadyan

  - o2 Box 6431


ramips-mt7621
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Cudy

  - X6 (v1, v2)

- D-Link

  - DAP-X1860 (A1)

- GL.iNet

  - GL-MT1300

- Mercusys

  - MR70X (v1)

- Xiaomi

  - Mi Router 3G


ramips-mt76x8
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- TP-Link

  - RE200 (v3)


realtek-rtl838x
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- D-Link

  - DGS-1210-10P


ipq40xx-generic
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- AVM

  - FRITZ!Box 7520


ipq40xx-mikrotik
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Mikrotik

  - hAP ac2


Bugfixes
--------

* Enterasys WS-AP3705i now uses the correct image-name for use with the autoupdater
  (`#2819 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/2819>`_)

* Reduce memory Usage for ath10k on ZyXEL WRE6606 devices
  (`#2842 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/2842>`_)

* Replace the Workaround for failed boots on ath79 with a proper fix.
  (`#2784 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/2784#issuecomment-1452126501>`_)

* AVM FRITZ!Box 7360 v2 flashed with the incorrect image for v1 will automatically update to the correct image.

* Revert OOM inducing switch of ath79 Wave2 firmware back to -ct
  (`#2879 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/pull/2879>`_)

Known issues
------------

* Upgrading EdgeRouter-X from versions before v2020.1.x may lead to a soft-bricked state due to bad blocks on the NAND flash which the NAND driver before this release does not handle well.
  (`#1937 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/1937>`_)

* The integration of the BATMAN_V routing algorithm is incomplete.

  - Mesh neighbors don't appear on the status page. (`#1726 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/1726>`_)
    Many tools have the BATMAN_IV metric hardcoded, these need to be updated to account for the new throughput
    metric.
  - Throughput values are not correctly acquired for different interface types.
    (`#1728 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/1728>`_)
    This affects virtual interface types like bridges and VXLAN.

* Default TX power on many Ubiquiti devices is too high, correct offsets are unknown
  (`#94 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/94>`_)

  Reducing the TX power in the Advanced Settings is recommended.

* In configurations without VXLAN, the MAC address of the WAN interface is modified even when Mesh-on-WAN is disabled
  (`#496 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/496>`_)

  This may lead to issues in environments where a fixed MAC address is expected (like VMware when promiscuous mode is disallowed).

