Gluon 2020.2.3
==============

Bugfixes
--------

- LEDs on the ASUS RT-AC51 are now fully functional.

- Netgear EX6150v1 randomly booting into failsafe mode has been fixed.
  This happened dependant on the state of the mode setting switch.

- Dnsmasq has been patched against multiple security issues in its DNS response validation.
  See the OpenWrt advisory at https://openwrt.org/advisory/2021-01-19-1


Other changes
-------------

- Linux kernel has been updated to 4.14.224
- batman-adv fixes were backported from its 2021.0 release
- OpenSSL has been updated to 1.1.1k

Known issues
------------

* Upgrading EdgeRouter-X from versions before v2020.1.x may lead to a soft-bricked state due to bad blocks on the
  NAND flash which the NAND driver before this release does not handle well.
  (`#1937 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/1937>`_)

* The integration of the BATMAN_V routing algorithm is incomplete.

  - Mesh neighbors don't appear on the status page. (`#1726 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/1726>`_)
    Many tools have the BATMAN_IV metric hardcoded, these need to be updated to account for the new throughput
    metric.
  - Throughput values are not correctly acquired for different interface types.
    (`#1728 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/1728>`_)
    This affects virtual interface types like bridges and VXLAN.

* Default TX power on many Ubiquiti devices is too high, correct offsets are unknown
  (`#94 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/94>`_)

  Reducing the TX power in the Advanced Settings is recommended.

* In configurations not using VXLAN, the MAC address of the WAN interface is modified even when Mesh-on-WAN is disabled
  (`#496 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/496>`_)

  This may lead to issues in environments where a fixed MAC address is expected (like VMware when promiscuous mode is
  disallowed).

