Gluon 2023.1.1
==============

This is the first service release for the Gluon 2023.1.x line, fixing regressions reported by
the community.

Important notes
---------------

Upgrades to this version are only supported from releases v2021.1 and later.

**Note:**
This release was found to be soft-bricking AVM Fritz!Box 7520 and 7530.
We advice to not offer the release for these two devices until this gets fixed.
Affected devices can be recovered to Fritz!OS and then reinstalled by using the (`AVM Recovery Tool <https://download.avm.de/fritzbox/fritzbox-7530/other/recover/>`_)

Bugfixes
--------

- x86: fix config loss during direct upgrades from v2021.1.x to v2023.1.x (`#2972 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/pull/2972>`_)

- tunneldigger: fix regression in v2023.1 caused by an always failing watchdog script resulting in endless restarts (`#2987 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/pull/2987>`_)

- tunneldigger: fix regression in v2023.1 with DNS lookups not using the wan-dnsmasq (`#3001 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/pull/3001>`_)

- gluon-wan-dnsmasq: fix regression in v2023.1 with restart handling and disable DNS caching on the WAN side (`#2991 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/pull/2991>`_)

- D-Link DIR-860L B1: fix regression in v2023.1 that prevented direct upgrades from v2021.1.x to v2023.1.x (`#2990 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/pull/2990>`_)

- Fix build issues with groff 1.23.0+ on the build host (`#3001 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/pull/3001>`_)


Known issues
------------

* The integration of the BATMAN_V routing algorithm is incomplete.

  - Mesh neighbors don't appear on the status page. (`#1726 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/1726>`_)
    Many tools have the BATMAN_IV metric hardcoded, these need to be updated to account for the new throughput
    metric.
  - Throughput values are not correctly acquired for different interface types.
    (`#1728 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/1728>`_)
    This affects virtual interface types like bridges and VXLAN.

* Default TX power on many Ubiquiti devices is too high, correct offsets are unknown
  (`#94 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/94>`_)

  Reducing the TX power in the Advanced Settings is recommended.

* In configurations without VXLAN, the MAC address of the WAN interface is modified even when Mesh-on-WAN is disabled
  (`#496 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/496>`_)

  This may lead to issues in environments where a fixed MAC address is expected (like VMware when promiscuous mode is disallowed).

* EFI only systems won't boot due to removed EFI support (introduced in v2023.1). This was necessary to work around a bug that
  causes a config loss during direct upgrades from v2021.1.x to v2023.1.x with the *x86-64*, *x86-generic* and *x86-legacy* targets
  (`#2967 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/2967>`_).

  It is planned that the next major release will reintroduce EFI support.

* AVM Fritz!Box 7520 and 7530 get soft-bricked by this release. The issue was introduced by a kernel bump.
  (`#3023 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/3023>`_)
