Gluon 2020.2
============

Added hardware support
----------------------

ath79-generic
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* GL.iNet

  - GL-AR750S

* TP-Link

  - CPE220 (v3)

ipq40xx-generic
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* EnGenius

  - ENS620EXT [#outdoor]_

* Linksys

  - EA6350 (v3)

lantiq-xrx200
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* TP-Link

  - TD-W8970

lantiq-xway
~~~~~~~~~~~

* NETGEAR

  - DGN3500B

ramips-mt76x8
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
* Cudy

  - WR1000


x86-legacy [#newtarget]_
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* Devices older than the Pentium 4


.. [#newtarget]
  This is a new target.

.. [#outdoor]
  This device is supposed to be set up outdoors and will therefore have its outdoor mode flag automatically enabled.


Major changes
-------------

Device Classes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Devices are now categorized into device classes. This device class can determine which features
as well as packages are installed on the device when building images.

Currently there are two classes used in Gluon, *tiny* and *standard*. All devices with less than 64M of RAM or
less than 7M of usable firmware space are assigned to the tiny class.

WPA3 support for Private WLAN
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The private WLAN now supports WPA3-SAE key exchange as well as management frame protection (802.11w).
For this to work, the firmware needs to be built with the *wireless-encryption-wpa3* feature.

OWE on Client Network
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Gluon now allows to configure a VAP for the client network which supports opportunistic encryption on the
client network for devices which support the OWE security type (also known as Enhanced Open).

This encrypted VAP can be the only available access point or be configured in addition to an unencrypted VAP.
In the latter case, the transition mode can be enabled, which enables compatible devices to automatically
connect to the encrypted VAP while legacy devices continue to use the unencrypted connection.

There are issues with some devices running Android 9 when connecting to a transition mode enabled network. See the site documentation for more information.

SAE Encrypted Mesh Links
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Mesh links can now be operated in an encrypted mode using SAE authentication. For this to work, a common shared secret
has to be distributed to all participating nodes using the site.conf.

Responsive status page
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The status page design is now responsive and reflows better on mobile devices.

Primary domain code
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The primary domain code is now visible on the node status page as well as in the respondd information
emitted by the node.

Logging
~~~~~~~

The new *gluon-logging* package allows to configure a remote syslog server using the site.conf.
This package can only be included when *gluon-web-logging* is excluded.

Peer cleanup in fastd
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

fastd peers and groups are now removed on update in case they do not exist in the new site configuration.
To preserve a custom peer across updates, add the *preserve* key to the peer's UCI configuration and set it to ``1``.


Bugfixes
--------

- The WAN MAC address now matches the one defined in OpenWrt if VXLAN is enabled for the selected domain.

- *gluon-reload* now reloads all relevant services.

- Disabling outdoor mode and enabling meshing in the config mode can now be performed in a single step.

- Fixed section visibility with enabled outdoor mode in config mode.


Site changes
------------

site.mk
~~~~~~~

Starting with version 19.07 OpenWrt ships the urngd entropy daemon by default.
It replaces the haveged daemon, for which we removed the support in Gluon. Remove ``haveged`` from your package selection.


Internal
--------

Editorconfig
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Gluon now ships a *editorconfig* file to allow compatible editors to automatically apply key aspects of Gluon's code style.

Continuous Integration
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* Jenkins

  - The CI now has a test stage to verify Gluons runtime functionality.

* GitHub Actions

  - GitHub actions is now enabled for the Gluon project, build-testing all available targets.

Build system
~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Source code minification can now be skipped by enabling the GLUON_MINIFY flag.

- Enabling the GLUON_AUTOREMOVE flag will remove package build directories after they are built.
  This reduces space consumption at the expense of subsequent builds being slower.


Known issues
------------

* Out of memory situations with high client count on ath9k.
  (`#1768 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/1768>`_)

* The integration of the BATMAN_V routing algorithm is incomplete.

  - Mesh neighbors don't appear on the status page. (`#1726 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/1726>`_)
    Many tools have the BATMAN_IV metric hardcoded, these need to be updated to account for the new throughput
    metric.
  - Throughput values are not correctly acquired for different interface types.
    (`#1728 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/1728>`_)
    This affects virtual interface types like bridges and VXLAN.

* Default TX power on many Ubiquiti devices is too high, correct offsets are unknown
  (`#94 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/94>`_)

  Reducing the TX power in the Advanced Settings is recommended.
