Gluon 2022.1
============

Important notes
---------------

Upgrades to v2022.1 and later releases are only supported from releases v2020.1 and later. This is due to migrations that have been removed to simplify maintenance.


Added hardware support
----------------------

ath79-generic
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

-  D-Link

   -  DAP-2660 A1

-  Enterasys

   -  WS-AP3705i

-  Siemens

   -  WS-AP3610

-  TP-Link

   -  Archer A7 v5
   -  CPE510 v2
   -  CPE510 v3
   -  CPE710 v1
   -  EAP225-Outdoor v1
   -  WBS210 v2

ath79-mikrotik
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

-  Mikrotik

   -  RB951Ui-2nD

ipq40xx-generic
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

-  Aruba Networks

   -  AP-303H
   -  AP-365
   -  InstantOn AP11D
   -  InstantOn AP17

ipq40xx-mikrotik
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

-  Mikrotik

   -  SXTsq-5-AC

ramips-mt7620
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

-  Xiaomi

   -  Mi Router 3G (v2)

ramips-mt7621
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

-  Cudy

   -  WR2100

-  Netgear

   -  R6260
   -  WAC104
   -  WAX202

-  TP-Link

   -  RE500
   -  RE650 v1

-  Ubiquiti

   -  UniFi 6 Lite

-  Xiaomi

   -  Mi Router 4A (Gigabit Edition)

ramips-mt7622
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

-  Linksys

   -  E8450

-  Xiaomi

   -  AX3200

-  Ubiquiti

   -  UniFi 6 LR

ramips-mt76x8
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

-  GL.iNet

   -  microuter-N300

-  Netgear

   -  R6020

-  RAVPower

   -  RP-WD009

-  TP-Link

   -  Archer C20 v4
   -  Archer C20 v5
   -  RE200 v2
   -  RE305 v1

-  Xiaomi

   -  Mi Router 4C
   -  Mi Router 4A (100M Edition)

rockchip-armv8
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

-  FriendlyElec

   -  NanoPi R2S

mpc85xx-p1010
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

-  Sophos

   -  RED 15w rev. 1

mpc85xx-p1020
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

-  Extreme Networks

   -  WS-AP3825i

Removed Devices
---------------

This list contains devices which do not have enough memory or flash to
be operated with this Gluon release.

-  D-Link

   -  DIR-615 (C1, D1, D2, D3, D4, H1)

-  Linksys

   -  WRT160NL

-  TP-Link

   -  TL-MR13U (v1)
   -  TL-MR3020 (v1)
   -  TL-MR3040 (v1, v2)
   -  TL-MR3220 (v1, v2)
   -  TL-MR3420 (v1, v2)
   -  TL-WA701N/ND (v1, v2)
   -  TL-WA730RE (v1)
   -  TL-WA750RE (v1)
   -  TL-WA801N/ND (v1, v2, v3)
   -  TL-WA830RE (v1, v2)
   -  TL-WA850RE (v1)
   -  TL-WA860RE (v1)
   -  TL-WA901N/ND (v1, v2, v3, v4, v5)
   -  TL-WA7210N (v2)
   -  TL-WA7510N (v1)
   -  TL-WR703N (v1)
   -  TL-WR710N (v1, v2)
   -  TL-WR740N (v1, v3, v4, v5)
   -  TL-WR741N/ND (v1, v2, v4, v5)
   -  TL-WR743N/ND (v1, v2)
   -  TL-WR840N (v2)
   -  TL-WR841N/ND (v3, v5, v7, v8, v9, v10, v11, v12)
   -  TL-WR841N/ND (v1, v2)
   -  TL-WR843N/ND (v1)
   -  TL-WR940N (v1, v2, v3, v4, v5, v6)
   -  TL-WR941ND (v2, v3, v4, v5, v6)
   -  TL-WR1043N/ND (v1)
   -  WDR4900

-  Ubiquiti

   -  AirGateway
   -  AirGateway Pro
   -  AirRouter
   -  Bullet
   -  LS-SR71
   -  Nanostation XM
   -  Nanostation Loco XM
   -  Picostation

-  Unknown

   -  A5-V11

-  VoCore

   -  VoCore (8M, 16M)

Atheros target migration
------------------------

All Atheros MIPS devices built with the ``ar71xx-generic``,
``ar71xx-nand`` as well as ``ar71xx-tiny`` were deprecated upstream and
are therefore not available with Gluon anymore.

Many devices previously built with ``ar71xx-generic`` and
``ar71xx-nand`` are now available with the ``ath79-generic`` as well as
``ath79-nand`` target respectively.

Missing devices
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The following devices have not yet been integrated into Gluons ath79
targets.

-  8Devices

   -  Carambola 2

-  Aerohive

   -  HiveAP 121

-  Allnet

   -  ALL0315

-  Buffalo

   -  WZR-HP-G300NH2
   -  WZR-HP-G450H

-  GL.iNet

   -  6408A v1

-  NETGEAR

   -  WNDR4300
   -  WNDRMAC
   -  WNDRMAC v2

-  TP-Link

   -  WR2543

-  Ubiquiti

   -  Rocket

-  WD

   -  MyNet N600
   -  MyNet N750

-  ZyXEL

   -  NB6616
   -  NB6716

Features
--------

WireGuard
~~~~~~~~~

Gluon got WireGuard support. This allows offloading **encrypted**
connections into kernel space, increasing performance by forwarding
packets without the need for context switches between user and kernel
space.

In order to reuse existing (already verified) fastd-keypairs for
WireGuard, a key derivation procedure is `currently being
developed <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/pull/2601>`__. This
should ease migration from fastd to WireGuard in case whitelisting VPN
keys is desired.

fastd L2TP
~~~~~~~~~~

fastd can now act as a connection broker for unencrypted L2TP-based
tunneling within Gluons mesh-vpn framework. This new ``null@l2tp``
connection method allows for increased performance within existing
fastd setups.

In addition to a sufficiently
:ref:`configured fastd-based VPN server<vpn-gateway-configuration>`,
this requires further modifications to a sites :ref:`VPN fastd methods<VPN fastd methods>`.

Major changes
-------------

OpenWrt
~~~~~~~

This release is based on the newest OpenWrt 22.03 release branch.
It ships with Linux kernel 5.10 as well as wireless-backports 5.15.


Network changes (DSA / Upgrade-Behavior)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The ``ramips-mt7621`` and ``lantiq-xrx200`` targets now use the upstream DSA
subsystem instead of OpenWrt swconfig for managing ethernet switches.

Gluon detects the existing user-intent and automatically applies it over
to DSA syntax. See the section about network reconfiguration for more
details.

System reconfiguration
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The network and system-LED configurations are now re-generated after
each update / invocation of ``gluon-reconfigure``.

The user-intent is preserved within Gluon’s implemented functionality
(Wired-Mesh / Client access / WAN).

As an additional feature, Gluon now supports assigning roles to
interfaces. This behavior is explained
:ref:`here<wired-mesh-commandline>`.

Site changes
------------

VPN provider MTU
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To account for multiple VPN methods available for a site, the MTU used
for the VPN tunnel connection is now moved to the specific VPN provider
configuration. For fastd this means that ``mesh_vpn.mtu`` needs to be
moved to ``mesh_vpn.fastd.mtu``. (`#2352 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/pull/2352>`__)

Preconfigured Interfaces Roles
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Instead of ``mesh_on_wan`` and ``mesh_on_lan`` there is now an
``interfaces`` block to configure the default behavior of network
interfaces. Details can be found in the 
:ref:`documentation<user-site-interfaces>`.

Minor changes
-------------

-  The ``brcm2708-bcm2708`` ``brcm2708-bcm2709`` ``brcm2708-bcm2710``
   targets were renamed to ``bcm27xx-bcm2708`` ``bcm27xx-bcm2709`` and
   ``bcm27xx-bcm2710``
-  The GL.iNet GL-AR750S was moved to the ``ath79-nand`` subtarget
-  Gluon now ships the ath10k-ct firmware derivation for
   QCA9886 / QCA9888 / QCA9896 / QCA9898 / QCA9984 /
   QCA9994 / IPQ4018 / IPQ4028 / IPQ4019 / IPQ4029
   radios (`#2541 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/pull/2541>`__)
-  WolfSSL instead of OpenSSL is now used when built with WPA3 support
-  The option to configure the wireless-channel independent from the
   site-selected channel was moved from
   ``gluon-core.wireless.preserve_channels`` to
   ``gluon.wireless.preserve_channels``
-  ``gluon-info`` is a new command that provides information about the
   current node
-  ``GLUON_DEPRECATED`` is now set to 0 by default
-  To reboot a running gluon-node into setup-mode, Gluon now offers the
   ``gluon-enter-setup-mode`` command
-  Devices without WLAN do not show the private-wifi configuration
   anymore
-  The Autoupdater now uses the site default branch in case it is
   configured to use a non-existent / invalid branch

Known issues
------------

* A workaround for Android devices not waking up to their MLD subscriptions was removed,
  potentially breaking IPv6 connectivity for these devices after extended sleep periods

* Upgrading EdgeRouter-X from versions before v2020.1.x may lead to a soft-bricked state due to bad blocks on the NAND flash which the NAND driver before this release does not handle well.
  (`#1937 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/1937>`_)

* The integration of the BATMAN_V routing algorithm is incomplete.

  - Mesh neighbors don't appear on the status page. (`#1726 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/1726>`_)
    Many tools have the BATMAN_IV metric hardcoded, these need to be updated to account for the new throughput
    metric.
  - Throughput values are not correctly acquired for different interface types.
    (`#1728 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/1728>`_)
    This affects virtual interface types like bridges and VXLAN.

* Default TX power on many Ubiquiti devices is too high, correct offsets are unknown
  (`#94 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/94>`_)

  Reducing the TX power in the Advanced Settings is recommended.

* In configurations without VXLAN, the MAC address of the WAN interface is modified even when Mesh-on-WAN is disabled
  (`#496 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/496>`_)

  This may lead to issues in environments where a fixed MAC address is expected (like VMware when promiscuous mode is disallowed).
