Gluon 2023.1
============

Important notes
---------------

Upgrades to v2023.1 and later releases are only supported from releases v2021.1 and later.
This is due to migrations that have been removed to simplify maintenance.


Added hardware support
----------------------

ath79-generic
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Extreme Networks

  - WS-AP3805i

ath79-nand
~~~~~~~~~~

- GL.iNet

  - GL-XE300

ramips-mt7621
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- TP-Link

  - EAP615-Wall

- Wavlink

  - WS-WN572HP3 4G

ramips-mt76x8
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- TP-Link

  - TL-MR6400 (v5)


Features
--------

DNS Caching
~~~~~~~~~~~

DNS caching using the dnsmasq resolver is reintroduced.

See the :ref:`DNS caching documentation <dns-caching>` section for
details on how to enable this feature.

Cellular Modem Support
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Support for using cellular data connections as the primary uplink connection has been added
to Gluon. This is supported for hardware that comes with a built-in cellular modem. The required user
configuration for the APN and SIM-PIN can be performed in the Advanced Settings in Config Mode.

To use this feature in config-mode, the ``web-cellular`` needs to be enabled in ``site.mk``.

Interface Role UI
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Interface Roles can now be assigned from the Network page of the Advanced Settings
in Config Mode. This configuration is preserved on Gluon upgrades.

WireGuard Key Translation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This release adds a new mechanism for seamlessly translating existing fastd private keys on the nodes into
equivalent WireGuard keys. The corresponding public keys can be translated **separately** on the servers.
This mitigates the need to re-exchange public keys for communities when migrating to WireGuard-based VPN.

See the :ref:`gluon-mesh-vpn-key-translate <gluon-mesh-vpn-key-translate>` section for details.


Bugfixes
--------

- Custom channel lists using a radios ``channels`` UCI option are now preserved on upgrade
  in case ``gluon.wireless.preserve_channels`` is set.
- Custom HT modes for radios are now preserved when ``gluon.wireless.preserve_channels``
  is set.
- Broken mesh links between MediaTek 11ax and Qualcomm 11ac hardware are worked around. (`#2905 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/pull/2905>`_)
- Fixed a bug in the MediaTek MT7621 NAND driver that caused devices to end in a bootlooping state
  after the initial installation.


Minor changes
-------------

- Images built for the ``x86`` targets are now natively bootable on
  EFI systems without CSM or BIOS support modes.


Known issues
------------

* The integration of the BATMAN_V routing algorithm is incomplete.

  - Mesh neighbors don't appear on the status page. (`#1726 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/1726>`_)
    Many tools have the BATMAN_IV metric hardcoded, these need to be updated to account for the new throughput
    metric.
  - Throughput values are not correctly acquired for different interface types.
    (`#1728 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/1728>`_)
    This affects virtual interface types like bridges and VXLAN.

* Default TX power on many Ubiquiti devices is too high, correct offsets are unknown
  (`#94 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/94>`_)

  Reducing the TX power in the Advanced Settings is recommended.

* In configurations without VXLAN, the MAC address of the WAN interface is modified even when Mesh-on-WAN is disabled
  (`#496 <https://github.com/freifunk-gluon/gluon/issues/496>`_)

  This may lead to issues in environments where a fixed MAC address is expected (like VMware when promiscuous mode is disallowed).
